Add EK Certificate Chain support (#116)
keylime/enhancements: 1552_ek_certificate_chain.md

|Root CA | Intermediate | Intermediate | EK |
|On Die CSME P_MCC 00001881 Issuing CA| CSME MCC ROM CA | CSME MCC SVN01 Kernel CA | CSME MCC PTT  01SVN |

This is also defined by the [TCG EK specification](https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/wp-content/uploads/TCG-EK-Credential-Profile-V-2.5-R2_published.pdf) (Chapter 2.2.1.5.2)

The current setup only allows to verify the EK cert against the `tpm_cert_store`.
As the EK certificate is signed by intermediate certificates, which are unique to device,
it is not possible to verify the EK certificate against the `tpm_cert_store`. The EK
must be verified against the EK Certificate Chain, till the top level certificate
from the chain can be verified against the `tpm_cert_store`.

## Motivation

Add support for intel firmware TPMs and possibly other TPMs that provide an EK certificate chain,
or setups that also depend on a certificate chain that must work offline or without any other
access to the chain.

### Goals

* Verify EK certificates that are not signed directly by a root ca, but require the verification of a chain.

### Non-Goals

* Implementing a generic interface to provide the content of any NV-Index.

## Proposal

> * keylime_agent: update `ekcert` field to use PEM format, so multiple certificates can be stored in the field and a marker exists that shows the start and end of each certificate.

Reviewer: Just a note: this is an API breaking change as it changes the ABI (it is backwards incompatible). This requires a major API version bump.

> * keylime_agent, add `ek_ca_chain` to `ekcert` field and send to registrar. Update `ekcert` field to use PEM format, so multiple certificates can be stored in the field and a marker exists that shows the start and end of each certificate.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* keylime_agent: update `ekcert` field to use PEM format, so multiple certificates can be stored in the field and a marker exists that shows the start and end of each certificate.
```

* keylime registrar, store `ekcert` in database, as it is already done.
* keylime tenant, verify chain in `ekcert`. Use "top" certificate from chain to verifiy against `tpm_cert_store`. In case of a single certificate the check of the chain is immediately finished as there is no certificate "above" and the `ekcert` is the "top" certificate that will be verified against the `tpm_cert_store`.

### User Stories

#### Story 1
Users will be able to use keylime with intel firmware TPMs (11th gen core and onwards),
or any other TPM that stores an EK certificate that is signed by a chain that is stored
in the TPM.

### Risks and Mitigations

#### Registrar/Tenant could be become incompatible with older database

> * Update existing database values for `ekcert` to PEM format.

Reviewer: Note: make sure the newer version of the registrar and tenant can read both formats from the database (DER and PEM), to keep it compatible with data coming from an existing database.

  * Theoretically the certificates can be in any order. This would require an option to make a sorting possible in the agent. As it does not make really sense to store the chain in an unsorted order i would postpone any implementation till this case really exists.
  * Only a subset of the NV-Index-Handles may be required. This would require an option to filter/set the required handles. I would also wait for implementation till a real case exists for that.
* as the certificate chain is stored in DER format, first the certificates must be separated
* transform der DER certificates into PEM format.
* send the chain to the keylime server

The certificate chain should be transformed and sorted by the keylime-agent to keep the work
away from the server and provide a generic server implementation that does not need to behave
a certain way (sort/filter the chain) depending on the client.

The keylime registrar only needs to store the certificate chain in the database.

The keylime tenant must detect the presence of an EK Certificate Chain and verify the
EK Cert against the chain, and finally the top level certificate against the `tpm_cert_store`.

> The flow can be kept mostly as it is in `check_ek`. In case of a present ek_ca_chain, the ek must be verified against the provided chain and in case of a success the ek will be replaced by the top level certificate from the chain. Afterwards the flow can be kept as it was.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The flow can be kept mostly as it is in `check_ek`. In case of multiple certs in `ekcert` , the ek must be verified against the provided chain and in case of a success the ek will be replaced by the top level certificate from the chain. Afterwards the flow can be kept as it was.
```

|Root CA | Intermediate | Intermediate | EK |
|On Die CSME P_MCC 00001881 Issuing CA| CSME MCC ROM CA | CSME MCC SVN01 Kernel CA | CSME MCC PTT  01SVN |

This is also defined by the [TCG EK specification](https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/wp-content/uploads/TCG-EK-Credential-Profile-V-2.5-R2_published.pdf) (Chapter 2.2.1.5.2)

The current setup only allows to verify the EK cert against the `tpm_cert_store`.
As the EK certificate is signed by intermediate certificates, which are unique to device,
it is not possible to verify the EK certificate against the `tpm_cert_store`. The EK
must be verified against the EK Certificate Chain, till the top level certificate
from the chain can be verified against the `tpm_cert_store`.

## Motivation

Add support for intel firmware TPMs and possibly other TPMs that provide an EK certificate chain,
or setups that also depend on a certificate chain that must work offline or without any other
access to the chain.

### Goals

* Verify EK certificates that are not signed directly by a root ca, but require the verification of a chain.

### Non-Goals

* Implementing a generic interface to provide the content of any NV-Index.

## Proposal

> * keylime_agent, send `ek_ca_chain` to registrar

Author: I will then implement the necessary changes to store the chain in the ekcert field and update the existing fields in the database. I will need to add "-----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----" and "-----END CERTIFICATE-----" (in PEM format) to the existing ekcerts in the database, as I require a delimiter in the chain.

Please notify me when everyone agrees that this is the way to proceed.

> * keylime_agent, send `ek_ca_chain` to registrar

Reviewer 2: Yep using PEM encoding for the chain is probably a good idea, as this is standard and then can also be easily read by e.g. openssl

> * keylime registrar, store `ek_ca_chain` in database

Reviewer: If possible, the chain should be stored with the EK certificate and no new entry is added to the database.
Sorry for suggesting that before, but I think the less we modify the database the better.

Author: will update

> * keylime tenant, verify `ekcert` against `ek_ca_chain` and `ek_ca_chain` against `tpm_cert_store`

Reviewer: The process of verifying the EK certificate necessarily involves verifying its signature against the whole chain.
I think this sentence can be removed or rephrased to not imply that there are separate steps on the verification process.

Author: will update

### User Stories

#### Story 1
Users will be able to use keylime with intel firmware TPMs (11th gen core and onwards),
or any other TPM that stores an EK certificate that is signed by a chain that is stored
in the TPM.

### Risks and Mitigations

#### Registrar/Tenant could be become incompatible with older database

> * Update database to new scheme, only a single key is added to the registar db 'ek_ca_chain'

Reviewer: If possible, avoid changing the database and store the certificate chain with the EK certificate.

#### Registrar/Tenant could become incompatible with older Agent
* Make 'ek_ca_chain' optional

#### Additional memory will be required to store the chain in the database.
* If the feature can't be used, due to missing certificates in the TPM, the memory footprint will stay around the same.

#### Providing big chains as attack
* Limit the amount of allowed chain size

> * Use mTLS to only allow verified clients access

Author: Will remove this

Revision 2 January 26, 2022 Published Page 15 of 60
The NV indices MUST be populated starting with index 0x01c00100 through index 0x01c001ff. There
is no requirement to store the certificates in any particular order whatsoever. If a concatenated
certificate chain does not fit in a single index, the chain MUST overflow to the next numerically larger
index in the list of NV Indices. If the storage space in a single index is insufficient to store the entire
certificate, the certificate MAY overflow into the next numerically larger index in the list of NV Indices.
```

The feature requires changes in the rust-keylime agent and in the keylime servers registrar and tenant. The certificate chain must and can be only provided by the keylime-agent.

The keylime-agent must do the following:
* get all available NV-Index-Handles in the defined range (`0X01C00100 - 0X01C001FF`)
* read the chain from the NV-Index-Handles
  * Theoretically the certificates can be in any order. This would require an option to make a sorting possible in the agent. As it does not make really sense to store the chain in an unsorted order i would postpone any implementation till this case really exists.

>   * Only a subset of the NV-Index-Handles may be required. This would require an option to filter/set the required handles. I would also wait for implementation till a real case exists for that.

Author: The rust-tss-esapi is a rust wrapper for the native tss-esapi library, which does not include a function to get the certificate chain. Perhaps it is not such a bad idea to have a custom implementation. The guidelines in the "TCG EK Credential Profile" provide manufacturers with considerable freedom in how to store certificates in the TPM. Additionally, there is the possibility of storing multiple certificate chains. In my opinion, the role of the Keylime agent is to read, filter, and sort the certificates. It should provide the Keylime registrar with exactly **one** verifiable chain at any given time. The server should not be responsible for managing multiple chains for clients or determining which chain can be verified. The location of the chain and how it should be processed (filtered/sorted) should be configurable through the agent's settings. This approach leads to the majority of the work (filtering/sorting) being handled by the agent, making the call to rust-tss-esapi equivalent to an nvread operation.

>   * Only a subset of the NV-Index-Handles may be required. This would require an option to filter/set the required handles. I would also wait for implementation till a real case exists for that.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the explanation. I can see that it then makes sense to implement in agent. If it is generic enough we can upstream it to the abstraction layer of the rust-tss-espai crate, which provides more high level common functions.

On another note we have our monthly meeting today: https://github.com/keylime/meetings/issues/82. Would be great if you have the time to join.

>   * Only a subset of the NV-Index-Handles may be required. This would require an option to filter/set the required handles. I would also wait for implementation till a real case exists for that.

Author: Sure, thank you. I will join.

>   * Only a subset of the NV-Index-Handles may be required. This would require an option to filter/set the required handles. I would also wait for implementation till a real case exists for that.

Reviewer: I'm not sure if I agree completely with adding the possibility for the agent to be configured on how to sort and filter certificates. For me, the agent simply has to find the chain that signed the EK certificate and provide it, no need for the other chains (why they are there in the first place?). Probably being able to configure the range of NV indexes to read is sufficient, but the default will be to read all of them anyway (i.e. in case the range is not configured).

I agree with @THS-on that getting the certificate chain looks generic enough to be implemented on `rust-tss-esapi` crate. It is definitely not specific to Keylime.
